
1. Timeout based heartbeat or ping based mechanisms have issues of not responding on time. This also increases network traffic. Pull based heartbeat is better in case of reducing network traffic
2. Heartbeats with Quorums are useful to detect if a cluster works as a leader follower node, in this the leader sends a heartbeat to all followers and expects majority of responses back to be considered live. Very chatty/noisy over the network. Also has the downside of maintaining the logic of quorum consensus.
3. Instead of heartbeat with a timeout, we can also use heartbeat with a counter, where each node sends a heartbeat to its neighbours and the receiving child increments the count and send to its neighbours, appending to its path, each node keeps a persistent counters. so that some node keeps a counter of each node on each node and one with the lowest count is considered lost.
4. Phi-accrual heartbeat, gathers information about the service's recent response times and creates a probability distribution of the node being down.
5. Gossip Failure Detection works by storing the most recent timestamp of heartbeat from each node, with the heartbeat it also sends the recent heartbeat for all the other nodes received on particular node, thus gossiping to improve the heartbeat protocol
6. Changing the narrative, what if if we detect a node failure a group of nodes which check the down node also go down. This prevents network partitions and helps with node failure detection. Here the main insight is choosing the group. Most of the time if we have a replica group of multiple services then this whole group goes down.